---
title: Prefer absolute time over relative time
---

The aim of this post is to convince you to use absolute time instead of relative
time.

I will start by defining them, these are not words from the dictionary.

Relative time: referring to a point in time relatively to another point in time.
e.g. "In 35 minutes".

Absolute time: referring to a point in time as a specific time. e.g. "At 8:30
pm".

I argue that under most circumstances, in human communication, absolute time
should be used instead of relative time.

The main reason to do so is that it is more accurate which means that its use
will improve punctuality. This is because when someone is given the time, of an
event, in relative time they don't usually bother to record when it was told to
them and so they quickly lose track of the *actual* time of the event (they know
it's in 35 minutes, but then don't know 35 minutes from *when*). As a result of
that they will have to approximate the time of the event introducing inaccuracy.
In the rare case when someone does actually check the time, they'll end up
computing the absolute time of the event anyway, you may as well do it for them,
something that is compounded if you're talking to multiple people.

Furthermore, when relative time is used people have more trouble grasping the
time that passes by. In fact this is even exploited by app developers to make
their apps more addictive [citation needed].

Another effect of using absolute time is that you'll give better ETAs. When
scheduling something in relative time people often underestimate the time it
will take because they only think of the perfect scenario [citation needed].
We are a lot less susceptible to this bias when using absolute time [citation
needed].

I'll end with a few examples from my day to day life where I used relative time
and paid the cost. Once I was working on a challenge with a friend. We had 2
hours to complete it. The challenge had a countdown clock to indicate the time
remaining. Whenever we wanted to have an idea of how much time we had left we
would go to the room where the clock was located. If the time had been given
absolutely or if we had thought of converting the relative time value we knew
into absolute time a lot of stress and time spent checking the clock could have
been avoided.

In a similar way, later that day we went to do the laundry. The washing machine
indicated the time required for a cleaning cycle to complete, it was one hour
and 7 seconds. Despite knowing that (and I knew it quite well considering I can
recall it to this day) I didn't know when to pick up my laundry because I
didn't know when it actually finished other than my estimate of the time that
had gone by, something terribly inaccurate and with such uncertainty that I
didn't bother checking after more than 2 hours.

Lastly, once I was on the phone with my girlfriend and needed to go for some
time. I was going to tell her that I will call back in 10 minutes but then
thought of absolute time, after calculating what 10 minutes from now in absolute
time would give I realised how it wasn't enough time at all for me to finish
what I had to.

I hope I have convinced you. Using absolute time instead of relative time will
improve your punctuality, the punctuality of those you interact with and will
make the time you give more reliable.
